This week on an extra special live
edition of Masters in Business, I'm at
the Audrain Newport Concourse, the
Elegance and my conversation is with
Wilhelm Schmidt. He is the CEO of
Alangenzona,
one of the finest watch [music]
companies in the world. They're located
in Glass Shuda, uh, Germany. Uh, our
conversation talked about everything
from collectible time pieces to
collectible cars. I found it fascinating
and I think you will also. With no
further ado, my discussion with a
Langan's owners will Schmidt
Wilhelm Schmidt, welcome to
>> Thank you so much.
>> Thank you so much for this uh for
hosting this event and and participating
uh in our conversation. I have I have so
many things to talk to you about, but I
have to start with this prestigious
concourse in this spectacular setting on
what could be the nicest day of the
year. [laughter]
What is the connection between classic
cars and fine mechanical time pieces?
>> Yeah, some mean people say me because I
like cars and watches and watches and
cars, but I think it's of course more
than that. um you know watchmaking is
that's what we emphasize on 90% of our
energy will go into watch making that
that's that's that's our home turf but I
believe as a global brand you also need
to find a world that is focused on
something else but where you have sort
of a common ground that you can walk on.
Um and about 14 years ago we were
looking for a platform um where we can
show the brand and where we can bring
customers to entertain. Um and if you
look at these cars um let's start with
the cars and and look at the word
concourse of elegance. So we're not in
vintage cars or racing. It's about
concourse of elegance. You know it's
about beauty. It's about heritage. It's
about craftsmanship. Um it's about
design and if you look onto the pillars
on which our brand rests it is exactly
it's its history heritage its design and
it's of course uh the craftsmanship. Um
and trust me these cars that you see
here as they were built they were built
by proper craftsman and even today
without proper craftsman you will not
keep them on the road. And I know that
you studied as an engineer and mechanic
before eventually moving over to to
watches. Obviously, the design ethos of
some of these cars.
>> Yeah.
>> They're just so phenomenal and
spectacular.
>> What sort of inspiration do you running
uh a fine watch maker take from the
designs of these cars? I you know it's
it's I I don't think you can immediately
take something from that world into our
world but if you look at these cars but
the first thing that comes to mind is
some of them are 50 60 80 100 years old
and we look at them today and they still
fascinate us. So obviously that design
survived all the different fashion,
change of taste, odds of time. They are
here today and they're as attractive as
they were probably back then when they
were brand new. Um if you look at
specifically the purpose-built car, you
know, the race cars, they were built for
only one purpose and that's what they
were perfect in. And I think in watches
you also have to identify what is it
that you emphasize on and then don't
compromise too much on it because if you
start making big compromises you end up
with something which is you know a
little bit of everything but nothing
particularly really good. So I think
that's what you can take from cars into
watches. identify the purpose and then
everything should direct to achieve that
if I call it the northstar you know that
purpose and for watches it's exactly the
same.
>> So there's a lovely white Mercedes Gwing
out there with the red interior and I
once heard someone ask you to compare a
Langa to a car and you thought about it
and said the Gwing because the design
was purposeful from start to finish.
Tell us what you mean by purposeful in
either watch or car design.
>> Well, you know, if you if you go back
and uh think about the mid50s in
Germany,
um I mean, I wasn't born there. I'm not
that old, but um you know, I can I see I
saw pictures I saw pictures of the
autoban. I saw the cars on the road back
then. And then think about very suddenly
something like the Gwing appears. I
mean,
an alien could have landed and caused
the same result. Um,
>> tubular frame and 210 horsepowers, you
know, do 235 kilometers an hour, high
speed.
>> Um, you know why they did the doors
>> cuz you couldn't have a door over that
frame for the body.
>> Was too the seals were too wide, right?
>> So, they just came up with the doors.
>> And you know what they did at Limmore?
wanted to permit that because in the
book it it it didn't say explicitly it's
not allowed but you know noa got
>> and they did negotiated absolutely they
did absolutely they did no but I think
the car was made for one purpose
>> and it was winning races in the first
place um and and and paving the way for
Mercedes internationally to be back
where they wanted to be and that is very
high up don't forget the price of these
cars. I mean, you could probably bought
streets for the same price, not houses,
streets.
>> Mhm.
>> In in in the mid-50s.
>> Arguably the first supercar uh ever
made. So, you're a connoisseur of
vintage cars. I know you have a couple
of Porsches. Tell us what else you like
in in classic automobiles.
>> I do like the what I call the oddballs.
Uh the Porsches that I have are actually
the exceptions because everybody knows
what a 911 is
>> and probably many people know what a 356
is.
>> So that's um
I don't say utility, but these cars are
you know the the 356 is my Swiss pocket
knife,
>> right? Because you know you can go on a
tour with it which I take that car a lot
and if the weather is nice you just open
the roof and it takes you 30 seconds and
if the rain comes it takes you 30
seconds to bring the roof back on. It is
not as watertight as you think it is. I
have to say there's still a lot of water
coming through but at least
>> you're roughly protected against the
environment. And the 911 is the car that
I never wanted and I will never sell.
It's just a fantastic driving car. Um,
but you know, the other cars that I have
are more for people that really know
about cars. Um, you know, if I share
somebody, I have a Fraser Nesh. Most
people wouldn't even know what that is.
And that's not a surprise because I
think they build about 600 cars pre-war
and about 83 postwar.
>> So, the likelihood that you know it if
you're not into the hobby is very high.
[clears throat]
So, I keep meeting people here, chatting
about cars, chatting about watches. When
I was doing a little research on you, it
turns out that you really know the
firm's clients, both CL customers and
collectors. Uh, what do you do at an
event like this? How much time do you
spend with some of the Langa collectors
and people who are so enthusiastic about
the brand?
>> I would say 90%. you know, if I'm not in
interviews with you, then I'm out there
>> and and and talking to our customers.
You know, that's the most important for
us because at the end, we mustn't forget
all that is not paid by Lango. This is
paid by our customers.
>> Mhm. So, there's a quote of yours I
really enjoyed. We want to surprise,
inspire, and enchant our clients with an
unprecedented imagination and ingenuity.
How do you go from those lofty goals to
turning it into a mechanical time piece?
[sighs]
>> Yeah. Well, first of all, it takes
strict discipline. Um, the moment you do
things that are not in line with who you
are, you may surprise people, but
probably not positively and and for sure
eventually will dilute your your your
brand equity. So, the first thing is you
have to apply discipline. That's why we
have six different watch families.
>> Mhm.
>> And we have sort of a horizon of seven
years and we want to play each watch
family at least once let's say within 24
months rolling.
>> Mhm.
>> Um so that's you know sort of the the
engineering structure all attempts. That
doesn't answer your question. I know. um
staying traditional but thinking out of
the box uh because our value set is very
traditional but our thinking is often
very much out of the box. I give you a
good example. The Tobion has been
invented by Brigy I think about 280
years back or so something like this. It
was there to enhance the accuracy of a
watch by you know eliminating the
mistake that happened through gravity
basically
>> and mostly pocket watches which were
always facing down
>> and and and of course it's a very
delicate mechanism. Um it it does do the
job because think about you put your
watch on desk next to your bed. So at
least for 10 hours it is exposed to
gravity without moving. Anyhow I want to
argue the necessity of a tobium.
What we found very interesting is that
it was there to enhance the accuracy but
it was impossible to set time correctly
because if you do that with a running
second it is pure luck that you hit
exactly the point.
>> So we were the first in 2009 to come up
with a mechanism that makes the torbion
stop. So the second hand comes to a stop
and you can adjust the time properly.
>> Mhm. We then [clears throat] went one
step further with the 1815 Torbio where
you not only stop the moment you pull
the crown that second then end goes to
zero which is the best way to adjust
your watch properly.
>> Now that sounds easy
>> but if you take into consideration that
that tobio has about 85 little parts.
>> Mhm.
>> The total weight is about 0.75 g.
>> Wow.
>> You you know any impact and the
mechanism will be destroyed. So you have
to be very careful in what you do. That
is just one example where we think out
of the box a chronograph with sort of a
a running minute which most of them do.
You know the second hand goes and it's
catching the the minute counter and then
as as the second hand goes on the minute
counter slowly moves which makes it
quite difficult is now two minutes or
three minutes or four minutes. So hours
in most cases have the jumping. So it's
the second end crosses the 12 it jumps
by one minute. So you're absolutely
clear it's one minute, two minute, three
minute or four minute. Not is it two and
a half or is it three? Just little
things that don't mean a lot for people
that are not into fine watches but they
mean the world for our customers.
>> I I want to talk about the Odysius in a
little bit and that particular
chronograph which is fairly unique,
>> but we're we're not quite there yet. And
I want to stay with the fact that Langa
is famously a German watch maker. What
advantages are there or disadvantages
for being a German maker in an industry
dominated by giant Swiss brands?
>> Look, it it I think it's more an
advantage than a disadvantage. Um, first
of all, I always say there is no Swiss
watch making and there's no German watch
making because think about it. I mean
you can find Swiss made watches for €100
and then you find the same for a few
million. How how how can how can be
there any common denominator that covers
the Swiss made from there to there. So
same for Germany, you know, we have
watches that are very inexpensive and
then you have us with sometimes watches
up to 2 million. Obviously at the at the
top end it's like a package.
>> It's like a box of chocolate, you know,
and our chocolate is craftsmanship,
history, and design. And we stay very
strict to it.
>> So some of the bigger brands put out
watches in the millions of units. Um,
Rolex famously two to three million. PC
is known to do about 75,000 watches.
Langa does a small fraction. Every piece
is made by hand,
assembled twice. Um,
>> and not because we can't get it right
first time, just [laughter] to make that
>> assembled first and then the pieces are
taken apart and hand engraved and
decorated.
>> Well, it's it's, you know, because we
use the original sources. Um we believe
that anything
um that nothing is much better than than
German silver.
>> Mhm.
>> You know that's the perfect material.
It's been it's been good for the last
150 years. So we believe in this and we
don't want to coat it
>> which means over time it will develop a
very nice patina. You know the silver
will get that little golden glue which
is beautiful. problem is you breathe on
it or you touch it,
>> it will look very ugly very soon and you
cannot even clean it. You have to
machine it.
>> So that means to to to to maintain
aesthetical and technical perfection.
>> You first have to make sure your
movement is absolutely up to scratch.
All tolerances are there. Everything is
adjusted. Everything works. You go
through the test and if you have
assurance you know that movement is like
it has to be it goes back to the watch
maker. He or she will disassemble it,
clean it, put in the final decoration
because now you know you don't have to
adjust anymore because that's done.
>> You clean it, you oil it, you put the
final decoration in case that it goes
again through the test and only then it
ends up on a on a happy wrist. So
inherently the way you build watches,
you're going to be somewhat limited in
production. H how does that affect the
decision-making process of what sort of
watches you make? And I know there are a
number of longer watches that are
limited editions of 100 or 50 or even
25. What's the thinking behind that?
>> Very easy. um you know sometimes let's
take the minute repeater perpetual
calendar that we launched this year in
April we know it's going to take us
three to four years to build to 50
watches
>> meaning from start to finish you'll do
uh a couple of watches every
>> year
>> wow
>> you know so and we know that so in
today's world to come up now with this
sort of capacity and say we produce a
100 means the last one will get to watch
in eight years,
>> right? That's a long time.
>> That doesn't make any sense. So, what
that's, you know, capacity
>> balanced by what we think we can expect
from a customer
>> to wait.
>> That usually gives an idea about the
limitation.
>> I was looking at the Langa Perpetual in
black.
>> Yes.
>> And I stopped by the boutique and they
said, "Figure somewhere between 12 and
15 months before yours is ready." Yeah.
>> So, when someone orders a watch
>> that goes into the system and my watch
is moving like it's literally that
specific
>> um
>> so the Odysius came out very unique
looking sports watch
>> then a lightweight titanium version.
>> No, first the white gold.
>> White gold. So it was 24th of October 19
stainless steel in April 2020 white gold
then titanium
>> then the honey gold
>> then the honey gold no then the odicious
chronograph
>> ah the chronograph which is
>> and then the honey gold
>> so I let's talk about the chronograph
most people are familiar with chronos
because they typically have two or three
sub dials
>> not with the odysius
>> it wouldn't work because of the design
of the dial you know if you
>> so the big day and date
>> if you take the dial off and you look at
the uh movement the upside of the
movement you will see it's almost all
blocked so there is no way that you come
through
>> and of course we also didn't want to
increase the size by much you know we
want to have a wearable watch
>> so the only way was to utilize the
center even more than we usually do and
that's why the chronograph the second
and the minute hand comes out of the
center
>> and When you reset the chronograph, it
does a little bit of a dance.
>> Yeah,
>> that's kind of unusual. I've spoken to a
lot of people about this. Nobody has
been able to explain that to me. You're
my last hope. Tell us about that.
>> Very easy. It's very easy because they
are yet together.
>> Mhm.
>> Um so if you reset it,
>> um the um the u minute hand will do as
many turns as the second because it's
linked,
>> right? And it is so quick that you can't
see it. I probably would take a good
camera and then you slow it down to see
it. But basically, if you have stopped
17 minutes and let's say 30 seconds,
>> um, what works like this is factually
seven times going around to come to
zero.
>> Why does it why does it do that?
>> Because it's geared together. It's
there, you know, because it comes out of
the center.
>> Strictly because of its ascent center
hand. And that's exactly the point,
>> huh? That that's really that's really
fascinating. So a watch like the Zetwork
or the Odysius, how long is that process
when someone first conceives of this?
Take us through how long it is from idea
till the finished product in the
boutique.
>> Very different. You know, Odicius, as I
said, took us 25 years basically. Um I
think that the real process where we
identify that's the phase you know that
looks
different to anything else on the
market.
>> Mhm.
>> That will not cannibalize anything
within our own range. Um to to to launch
to watch it the 24th of October in in in
in 2019 always good. Seven years.
>> Seven years from start to finish. That's
that's amazing.
>> Yeah. So, so yesterday at the event, two
new langas dropped the Saxonia Thin.
Yes.
>> In um black onx and platinum. Is that
right?
>> Yes. True. Onx, honey, gold and
platinum. Yeah.
>> Um really striking dress watches. The
Saxonia are sort of I don't want to call
it entry level, but they're less pricey
than some of the other watches.
>> They are more simple. That's how I saw
it. You know, it's for us it's all about
the amount of parts, the years it take
to develop, uh the the hours it takes to
assemble. Um that at the end will define
whether it's a complicated watch or I
would say a more simple watch and two
hands. I think we don't go more simple
than two hands.
>> And my first nice dress watch was a um
rose gold saxonium mood phase. You see
>> over black. Yes. And one of the things
that people are genuinely surprised is
the same level of detail and finishing.
What what you describe as simple a lot
of people think of in terms of price
point. There seems to be no difference.
>> No, no, no. It's you know if you look at
our our process in the manufacturing we
can you know the people that work on
finish they sometimes have no idea where
that part will end up. So they will not
say oh that goes into grand complication
we do it a little better or that goes
into thin or we do it a little that's
>> the same thing regardless million
dollars or entry level
>> we do not distinguish in quality at all
it's all the same emphasized on loft of
detail craftsmanship hand polishing
decoration hand engraving there is no
difference double assembly it's one
process it doesn't matter whether the
watch will cost €25,000 euro or 2
million.
>> And when people say to me, I'm looking
for an elegant dress watch, but
something that's not too pricey, my
answer is always the Saxonia. It's just
timeless and so elegant and continues to
just the design gets better over time
>> and and it's it's it's a you know,
people you look at it and you see it's
an Alango on watch. Um if you have
something complicated like this, you
have a lot of hands to work with. You
have the sub dials, you know, you have
the push but you can do a lot.
>> Mhm.
>> But I think one of the biggest challenge
for designers is you have two hands to
work with and not a lot on the on the
dial.
>> Make it an alango zuna.
>> So the datagramraph has been called one
of the best chronographs ever designed.
What's the core of that watch's appeal?
What makes that so special? I think it's
uh
it's it's it's more than just a watch.
Um you know, I I'm a watch collector
for a long long time. I can remember
when I opened a newspaper in in in in 20
in in um 94 and I saw the ad with the
four Langa watches.
um
where most companies around the world
were still using somebody else movement
and often the same supplier.
Here comes a chronograph which is one of
the crown things in watch making from
Germany in a very unique design with an
outsized date. I think it was a wakeup
call and and and we must not
underestimate
what that watch started in the watch
industry because before that chronograph
didn't play a role. There were two
supplier and that was it basically
>> after that and if you then go and and
and analyze what happened from then to
the following five six seven years a lot
of chronograph movements came out. So
that's why this watch is so important
for us because that was the first real
complication other than the Tobium
polymerit that we worked on. And I think
that was a wakeup call and it it it just
gave us a reputation as a solid uh watch
maker that it's the next level up.
>> For sure. Absolutely. The next level up.
So you get to spend a lot of time with
with clients, with customers, with
collectors.
>> How are you seeing the um their
expectations and desires changing? What
does the client base look for from Langa
over the next decade?
>> I think it does it never changed. Um
>> never changes.
>> No. Um you know, first of all,
do you have any idea what you were like
in three years from now on?
>> Who does exactly? So when people say,
"Oh, you come with a small watch because
you follow trend." I say, "Look, I mean,
I wish we had known seven years ago when
we started developing the movement." Uh,
we're not in the fashion industry
business. You know, our processes and
the time it takes to come to market is
so long that you maybe can anticipate,
but maybe you have to stay true to
yourself. And I think the one thing
which our customers expect from us is
authenticity.
It has to be an alanga.
And if you had followed the discussion
after we launched the Odysius
because you know we always said we only
precious metal and here come with steel.
>> Mhm.
>> And later on with titanium. So of course
there was a heated debate. Of course
there was and we were aware of it
because that is a tension that on
purpose we wanted.
Um
there were a lot of people that said,
"Nah, it's not for me. I see Langa as
dress watch only
there were luckily a lot more people
that say I want that watch desperately
where we can produce [clears throat]
fine." Um, however, it just opened up a
new chapter in our design language
because now we have a playground
to try out things that we would never do
with our classical watch families.
>> And every car enthusiast knows when the
Porsche 911 came out, the 356 purists
were upset. What What are you giving us
such a big car? Who needs six cylinders?
Absolutely. That's why they built the
912,
put the four-cylinder in, you know,
that's uh that's exactly what they did.
>> So, yeah, that's funny sometimes.
>> I I love this quote of yours, and I'm
wondering if it still applies. You said
part of Langa's success is that we're a
secret. Yeah.
>> So, question number one is what makes
that an asset? And question number two
is look at this event. How much longer
is this a secret?
>> Oh, it is. It is. It is. in the wide
world we are still absolutely unknown
and I think that's a good place to be.
Um
there are there are three reasons to it.
The one is um
what we do
is very difficult to understand
specifically at the price point that we
request for people that are not into
fine watch making. Why would you spend
so much money on a watch when your
iPhone gives you the time more
precisely? You know that the general
thinking
>> for sure.
>> The second is um in today's world you
don't want to show off too much. At
least
>> these are very much under the radar and
I am always shocked at people who
haven't the slightest idea when I'm
wearing this as opposed to the better.
>> Isn't that nice? I mean that gives you a
certain confidence and a certain
>> it's it's you know you don't need to
shout
>> and on the other hand and I'm sure you
can agree on it if you see somebody that
is also having a languna
it's not difficult to to get a
communication started isn't it
immediately you have something to chat
about if you know you know
>> you know and and that's why I believe it
is so important
>> to remain a secret I also admit the real
challenges to secret to share the secret
with you know the right crowd of people
because at the end you know I mean I'm
fine but whenever we take the new
apprenticeship trainee in in August
I feel the duty on my shoulders because
now they start a career as watchmaker
and they're in for the next 40 years. So
we need to make sure that the next
generation knows what we do and we stay
relevant for this.
>> So I only have you for a few more
minutes. I want to get to my last couple
of questions. Speaking of the next
generation,
>> yeah,
>> how do you appeal to younger buyers? Uh,
and and what sort of approach um do you
have as all these tastes seem to shift
amongst the 20 and 30ome crowd?
>> Yeah, I gladly don't have a real issue
here. Um, we have a surprisingly young
uh customer base. Mhm.
>> Um I always say that and I never
understood it. I mean if you're young
and you're interested what speaks
against quality, longevity, classless
and timeless design, robustness, uh
value creation. Um yeah, I mean it
doesn't matter whether you are 100 years
old or 10. Um if you're into that,
you're going to like it. Mhm.
>> Um, the way we connect with these people
is different to the way,
let's say, I was connected to the watch
industry because, as I grew up, it was
very difficult to find even specialized
magazines for
>> for watchers. Today, you have everything
you can think of. I I believe we live in
absolute paradise times for
>> for watch enthusiasts because never ever
in history have there been more watch
brands.
um
>> more information, more information
>> and easy accessible information.
>> You know, you can do your research
without leaving your room. That was
impossible in times, you know, where I
started to get into the hobby.
>> Although I I would tell people go see
the watch, go try it on, make sure
>> the only thing that matters. It's the
only I just say the natural habitat of a
wrist watch is the wrist.
>> The wrist. So to forget about looking at
something singing and ah I like it.
That's a good start. But the moment of
truth is you grab that watch, you put it
around your wrist, you look at yourself
and see is it me or is it not?
>> So how do you have access to every watch
there is? How do you decide what you're
going to grab that day to wear?
>> I you know this one because of you know
chronograph we're in a car world. Uh
it's the 1815. So that's a more
classical line. Mhm.
>> I'm a huge fan of chronographs and it
doesn't get any better than a
chronograph ratraon. So, you know that.
And I it's mid um
I think it works very nice with my tent
color right now. [laughter]
>> So, our last question, tell us what's
next for Longa and Sona. What surprises
are coming up down the road? What should
we be looking for? I think it's always
good to look for
but if I now share secrets there's no
surprise and that's the one thing people
love surprises
but um I can share with you
as much as is this is not the last
surprise for this year.
>> Oh really? So the the Saxonia thins not
the last surprise of 2025.
>> That's what I said.
>> Fantastic.
That was my conversation with Willilhelm
Schmidt, CEO of Alangenzona at the
Newport Audrain Concourse to Elegance.
Uh, extra special thanks to the team
that came up to Newport to help film
this. Alexis [music]
Noriega is my video producer. Sebastian
Escobar is my videographer. Anna Luke is
my producer. Sage Bowman is the head of
podcast at Bloomberg. [music]
I'm Barry Rholtz. You've been listening
to Masters in Business on Bloomberg
Radio.